

The aim of the present book is to present the proof of the Kepler
Conjecture. Several years have passed since a proof was first
obtained. Why give a new presentation of the proof?

The original proof was long and complex.  The complexity was not
because of conceptual challenges.  In fact, the proof makes only
modest demands on the theoretical training of the reader.  It is
possible to read and understand the proof with a knowledge of a
limited body of mathematics, such as basic calculus and elementary
Euclidean geometry.

Nevertheless, the proof involves many  calculation that are routine
and yet sometimes long and tedious.  The proof relies on the results
of computer programs.  An error in any calculation or a bug in the
computer code has the potential of toppling the entire proof.

The referees were conscientious and checked many of the
calculations.  However, the computer code was never seriously
checked, and even the most conscientious auditor can make an
occasional slip.

After all is said and done, no proof is more reliable than the
reliability of the processes that are used to verify its
correctness.  These processes include the checking that the author
makes before releasing the proof for public scrutiny, the checking
of the referees, and the checking done by readers over time.

In recent years, I have been increasingly preoccupied by the
processes that we rely on to insure the correctness of complex
proofs. Researchers from Frege to G\"odel, who solved a problem of
rigor in mathematics, found a theoretical solution but did not
extinguish the burning fire at the foundations of mathematics,
because they omitted the practical implementation. Some, such as
Bourbaki, have even gone so far as to claim that ``formalized
mathematics cannot in practice be written down in full'' and call
such a project
``absolutely unrealizable'' \cite[p 10,11]{Bo}. % Theory of Sets, page 10,11.

While it is true that formal proofs may be too long to print,
computers -- which do not have the same limitations as paper -- have
become the natural host of formal mathematics. In recent decades,
logicians and computer scientists have reworked the foundations of
mathematics, putting them in an efficient form designed for real use
on real computers.

For the first time in history, it is possible to generate and verify
every single logical inference of major mathematical theorems.  This
has now been done for the four-color theorem, the prime number
theorem, the Jordan curve theorem, the Brouwer fixed point theorem,
the fundamental theorem of calculus, and many other theorems.  Freek
Wiedijk reports that 63\% of a list of 100 ``top'' theorems have now
been checked formally \cite{freek}.

Some mathematicians remain skeptical of the process because
computers have been used to generate and verify the logical
inferences.  Computers are notoriously imperfect, with flaws ranging
from software bugs to defective chips.  Even if a computer verifies
the inferences, who will verify the verifier, or then verify the
verifier of the verifier?  Indeed, it would be unscientific of us to
place an unmerited trust in computers.

As I said above, I believe that mathematical proofs are ultimately
no more reliable that the processes we use to verify them.  We have
two competing verification processes.  The first is the traditional
process of referees, which depends largely on the luck of the draw
-- some referees are meticulous, others are careless.   The second
process is formal computer verification. In this case, the process
is less dependent on the whims of a particular referee.

In my view, choosing between the conventional referee process and
computer verification is like choosing between choosing between an
hourglass and an atomic clock as the scientific standard of time. It
impedes science to hold to the hourglass because of imperfections in
the atomic clock.

My standard of proof has become the highest scientific standard
available by current technology.  Today the highest available
standard is formal verification by computer.  This standard will
continue to evolve with the advancement of technology.

My dream is to have some day a fully formally verified solution to
the sphere packing problem.
This has not been done, but progress is being
made.  This book is an attempt to rearrange the proof
in such a way to make formal verification easier to do.

The proof style of formal proofs is different from that of
conventional proofs.  It is better to have a large number of short
snappy proofs, rather than a few ingenious ones.  Humans enjoy
surprising new perspectives, but computers prefer standardization.
Despite these differences, I have worked to make this a proof that
will be valuable both to humans and to computers.

\subsection{An unfinished manuscript}

\uf{It is with deep regret that I approach the end of my sabbatical year in Hanoi and Nijmegen with an unfinished manuscript in hand.  The end of the project is in sight, yet the time has come for me to give my battered wrists a rest and turn my attention to other projects.   I spent my lunch hour today with an unfinished masterpiece at the National Gallery in London.  My final days on this project will add a few hints of charcoal to my canvas.}

\uf{The various underlayers of the work remain exposed.  The first layer on the canvas gives
correct statements of lemmas and correct proofs.   The the proofs are reworked for clarity and simplicity and references are provided.  The mathematial material then worked into text, describing the context and purpose.  The text is reworked as needed from the perspective of English composition.  Finally, I had planned over one hundred figures for the book.  It is a book that cries out for illustration.   I hope that the first layer at least is complete.  Many passages go no further than this.
}

\uf{I started work on the Kepler conjecture in 1988.  Here I am in 2008 with an unfinished manuscript, which is no more than a blueprint of what the flyspeck formalization project should implement. I have sworn off this problem many times before.   I announced to the editors of Annals of my plans to withdraw the paper on the five year anniversary of submission.  They persuaded me to back down.   Each time, my obsessions has gotten the best of me.  Months ago, I wrote ``suffering'' in block capital letters on the yellow cover of my ragged desk copy of the DCG proof.  Inside the front cover is a note written long ago announcing that I am giving up the book.  It is time for me to make good on that promise.}

\uf{The starting point for this manuscript was the 2006 proof published  in Discrete and Computational Geometry.   The proof described here is essentially the same as that proof.  Considerably more detail has been added, obvious mistakes have been corrected, background material has been added, and the presentation has been substantially reorganized.  This manuscript is sufficiently developed that it now carries more weight on almost every point than the 2006 publication.}







